Down with Fascism!
Down with Imperialism!
Down! Down!
Long live revolution!
Long live! Long live!
Comrade?
Comrade, Manmatha?
You seem distracted these days.
Comrade, can you get me a pistol?
- Pistol?
Pistol?
Why do you need a pistol, comrade?
Revolution can't be achieved
with such a restless mind.
- Revolution is a big task.
- Then give it to me...
I won't waste my time
listening to lectures anymore.
Give it to me.
I can do it.
At the Nazi concentration camps...
Yes... yes...
what kind of gas?
What is it's chemical composition?
Rats have invaded my house.
I want to destroy them all.
Hmm!
Much ado about nothing, huh?
Hello? Gautam?
I... I need some hydrocyanic acid.
No... it's for Father's experiments.
Yes... I'll pay
whatever it costs...
Okay.
Indians are not as advanced
when it comes to scientific experiments.
They lack originality.
That this perception is a myth...
India's glorious past
is enough to prove that.
Mathematics...
Astrology...
Diagnosis...
Architecture...
The four pillars of Modern Science
took birth in India.
Then why are Indian scientists
lagging behind?
Think about it...
There's only one answer to it.
Poverty...
The lack of money in the past
was not so prominent
Keep quiet! It's Father...
Sit down.
This is now the biggest threat
in the field of scientific progress.
We're going through a dark time.
Obstacles in scientific progress
is dangerous for mankind.
Dear child, where are you?
Scientific progress...
- Mother is calling me...
- Go then.
Lack of proper eductaion...
And... bring me the tea.
Look around...
The pursuit of science is the only way
to deliver us from this darkness.
We need money for that.
Isn't it?
Large investments are needed
for radical inventions.
There's no lack of scientific talents
in this country.
What we lack is money.
We need money!
We need investments!
We need infrastructure!
Without modern equipment...
Damn it!
What happened?
Turn off the radio right now!
We have to realise that...
if lack of capital results
into scientific regression...
our Indian heritage will...
Need this... need that...
Needs and wants!
Unbearable bravado!
Jagadish Bose invented the millimeter-wave
in Calcutta University's broken lab.
Satyen Bose is inventing
new theories in Dhaka...
which even Einstein approves of.
And look at these people...
need this, need that.
Bloody excuses!
- Here you go.
- You're right.
Beggars can't be choosers.
No, this is fun.
Humans love to make a case
defending their failures.
Messed it up, huh?
The oil was bad.
What's there to laugh about?
You just said...
"Humans love to make a case
defending their failures."
Be grateful that
I'm cooking for you, Ajit.
Better keep quiet and eat it!
God knows when your wife, Satyabati,
will be back.
Listen, brother...
- How's her brother now?
- He's recovering.
The doctor has asked him to rest
for a while.
- I told Satya to stay back.
- Well, good advice.
Since the cook isn't here either,
eating is a...
When you call Satyabati,
please tell her...
that her brother-in-law
is not well.
Poor dear!
Instead of depending on my wife
who's your sister-in-law...
why don't you find this friend of yours,
a sister-in-law?
How long will you spend
your nights alone?
A few days back
I met Shibram at College Street.
You mean, Shibram Chakraborty?
Yes.
Ajit, won't you eat the eggs?
Guess what he said?
I asked him the same question.
Are you going to be a bachelor
all your life?
- Do you know what he said?
- What?
"Women are distressed
in this country.
"So, I chose not to torture
one of them.
- Which one?
- "The one I didn't marry."
Although we're laughing...
there's a terrible tragedy
in this humour.
Ajit, take me to
Shibram's mess one day.
- I've always wanted to meet him.
- Sure, I'll take you.
Look at Shibram...
he only demands sweets.
Then there's Debkumar.
Need this... need that!
How come the father
of a bright lad like Habul...
give speeches like that?
Who told you that a smart boy
will have a smart father?
And how do you know
he is not intelligent?
Sorry for the delay, sir.
Here's our joint life insurance policy.
A very lucrative policy.
It's a limited period offer.
Don't miss this opportunity.
Yes, I don't want to
lose this opportunity either.
Very well.
How much do you want to insure?
Umm...
Fifty thousand?
- Fifty?
- Yes...
Sure... why not.
A scientist like you
must have a secured future.
What will be the premium amount?
Please don't worry
about all that.
I'll try my best to give you
a discount.
I guess the policy will be
named after your child?
No, no...
It's for me and my wife,
Subhra Mitra.
- A joint policy.
- Very well!
Umm..should I mention
your child as the nominee?
Umm... no.
I don't want any nominee
for this policy.
Is Subhra your second wife?
Yes.
And the child is from
your first marriage?
- Yes.
- That's what I guessed.
How many?
- A daughter...
- Yes...
and a son.
Very well.
So if the stepmother
is not taken care of...
Subhra gets all the money...
- Mitra, right?
- Yes.
- It's Mitra.
- Okay.
It'll all go to Mrs. Mitra, right?
Very well.
He got married
for the second time.
Nothing else proves his foolishness
more than this.
Oh, really?
Should I tell
Satyabati about this?
You can.
That's the nature of a writer.
What is?
Creating trouble in a friend's life
to find plot points for a story.
Byomkesh!
What's it, Habul?
Why are you panting?
Something horrible happened!
My sister, Rekha...
You can't give up, Habul.
Come with me.
What will I do now, Byomkesh?
Father is out of town.
- My sister is all I have.
- Habul... Habul...
You have to stay calm
during this trying time.
What happened to Rekha?
Did she have any heart problems?
I don't know.
- Did she fall ill recently?
- No.
Okay, come.
Oh, Lord!
How could you do this to me?
You silly girl!
Your death has killed me too!
How will I face my husband now?
Is that your mother?
Hmm.
Dr. Rudra lives near by.
Doesn't he?
Yes.
Send someone for him then.
- Okay?
- Yes.
Let's go.
Where is the kitchen?
- This way.
- This way? Come, Ajit.
Oh my God!
Let's go.
(crowd protesting)
Come out!
Out at once!
- Where are you?
- Come out!
- You have to come out!
- You can't hide.
Law and order still exists
in this country!
What's the matter?
What does your father
think of himself?
He can run his deadly tests
on poor people like us?
What's the matter?
Please tell me in details.
My son was suffering
from Tetanus.
Your father has discovered
a new drug to cure it.
He gave it to my son
without testing it.
- My son died the next day!
- Dr. Rudra, come out!
(people protesting)
What happened?
Why are you people shouting?
A new medicine needs to be
tested on someone.
Can you always pass a test?
What do you mean?
Don't you value other's life?
What would your son do
if he were alive?
He'd either be a freedom fighter
or a thief?
The police would have shot him
like a dog.
He is a martyr for science!
You should be happy!
I'll go to the court!
Do you money to file a case?
A broke bum like you
will go against me in court?
You're lucky
that I didn't ask you to pay me!
Now get out!
Get out from here!
He left? How dare he?
(people protesting)
She died while lighting a match
for the oven.
Where is she?
Habul, Dr. Rudra is here.
What do you think?
For now... The girl had no idea how close
death was even moments before she died.
But how did this...
What happened?
Is she dead?
Yes. Best if you check once.
And you are?
Huh?
Just a neighbour.
This is Debkumar's daughter.
Yes.
- Is her name Rekha?
- Hmm.
Oh God!
Inform the police.
The cause of death is suspicious.
What's the cause of death?
I can't tell without
the autopsy report.
My fees is Rs. 32.
Send it to my house.
Habul...
- Habul?
- Hmm...
Which way is Rekha's room?
That... that way...
Rekha used to take Aspirin?
Yes.
She had headaches very often.
Byomkesh, this is life.
Her bed is still warm from last night...
And yet she has set out
on the eternal journey this morning.
Please control the philosopher in you
under these circumstances.
Insensitive!
Habul...
I...
I knew this would happen.
Rekha would commit suicide.
'To Nontu'.
Who is Nontu?
Rekha?
Is that a love letter?
No... no...
- Why didn't you go to college, brother?
- Let me see it.
- What?
- The letter you hid under the pillow.
- No... it's...
- Take it out.
That is...
- Rekha, I'm warning you.
- Brother... that's...
- Take it out..Rekha...
- No... brother...
Rekha, don't you...
Rekha, stop! Rekha...
No brother...
Rekha, I'll get you...
You evil girl!
You broke my bones...
Your bones won't break that easily.
What?
No... Nothing...
Hey, you dumb girl...
How dare you touch me
in dirty clothes?
You hag! Your touch has made me impure!
But your father won't see your fault.
It's all my fault.
Let him return.
Either it's my way or the highway!
Don't!
- Give me the letter.
- Let me go!
"My dear Rekha...
I'll wait for you near your house,
after college tomorrow.
Yours lovingly, Nontu."
Oh no!
Now that bloodsucking Dr. Rudra...
will be our relative?
- Hmm.
- Hmm?
He's Dr. Rudra's son.
Nontu is a good man.
A real good man...
My son will marry
your daughter...
Unbelievable!
Have you heard Wagner?
Famous German composer.
Hitler's favorite!
Listen to him.
It'll boil your blood.
Dr. Rudra, why don't you ask Nontu?
Nontu likes Rekha.
They'll be happy.
Nontu! Nontu!
Do you know Rekha?
I do.
Whatever he said...
Is it true?
Yes.
That means...
you know why he's here.
I see.
You may leave.
See, Dr. Rudra...
Actually, times are changing.
- Our time was different.
- 10,000.
- Beg your pardon?
- Rs. 10,000 as dowry.
Rs. 10,000!
Where will I get so much money?
"We can't get married anymore.
Your father wants Rs. 10,000.
My father can't give him
such a huge amount.
Here you go.
Ummm.
Wanted to marry your daughter off
to a doctor's son.
A peasant dreams of
being the king, huh?
When I asked for a necklace
you didn't care much.
You've always taken me for granted.
But you can go looking for money
for this girl!
Tell me, where will you get
all that money?
Useless!
Drawing random pictures
and boiling stupid things all day!
Don't know what my father saw in you!
You completely ruined my life!
A porter is more capable than you.
"I never imagined that our relationship
will fall apart like this.
I'll not give dowry to marry you.
I expected you to protest, at least.
Anyway...
I know it'll be very difficult for me
to live after this.
I had loved you.
Father, you took
the wrong decision.
I'm not answerable to you
for my decisions.
I've arranged your marriage
with Dr. Ghosh's girl, Sulekha.
Get married to her.
Father, I can't marry anyone
other than Rekha.
Nontu!
Rekha...
Rekha, hear me out...
Rekha, I've told my father off.
- Listen to me...
- There's nothing more to say, Nontu.
We're not rich like you
but we still have self-respect.
"You know
I can't marry anyone else.
But I can't live
in this house anymore.
Can you give me some poison?"
"I'm sure you can find some
in the doctor's chamber.
If you don't then
I'll die in some other way.
You know
I always stick to my words.
Yours lovingly, Rekha."
Can I talk to your mother once?
Byomkesh...
- Come, Ajit.
- This way.
What's going on here?
Can we talk inside?
Why do are you so eager
to enter a married woman's room?
We can talk here.
You might not know us.
We're your neighbours.
My name is Byomkesh Bakshi.
I'm a seeker of truth.
I'm not interested
in what you are selling.
No, no, I'm not selling.
I'm seeking.
- Searching...
- You might call it investigating.
Umm... you're clothes are clean, right?
No... umm... we bathe very early.
- Every day...
- Each and every day.
Please carry on.
I'll be right back.
Where are you going, boy?
Strangers are entering
your mother's room.
You should be here as a witness.
I don't want people
to blame me later.
Come in.
- Come, Habul.
- Come, boy.
Did you see Rekha
in the morning?
What can I say?
Our maid did not come today.
So I told Rekha
to clean the kitchen...
and to light the oven.
But I never force
my stepchildren to work.
I do as much as I can.
But there are so many chores
around the house.
It's not always possible
to do it myself.
Isn't it?
That's why I told Rekha
to light the oven...
and went for a bath
after cleaning this room.
I didn't go to the kitchen
after my bath. Then...
Girl, it's almost noon...
Is the oven working?
(chanting)
Do I have cook all the time?
Can't I be spared one day?
(chanting)
What's the matter?
Why aren't you answering?
Just because you are his first wife's child,
do you want me to treat you like a doll?
I was a pampered daughter too.
But my father
never spoiled me like this.
Now if I say this...
I'll be the bad one.
Why is there no...
What's wrong with you?
What's the matter, child?
Huh?
Hey, you...
Oh my God!
Habul... Habul!
What is it?
Rekha?
Re...
Believe me...
I've never interfered
in anyone's life.
My rotten luck!
I'm involved in this mess.
I'm the stepmother after all!
People will blame me, right?
My husband will not spare me.
God knows what he'll do.
He can't stand me.
Whatever I say irritates him.
Who? Debkumar?
Who else can it be?
I see.
Did you say anything hurtful
to Rekha today?
- Hurtful words?
- Yes...
Never.
I never say anything hurtful.
I'm not that sort of a person.
I'm living with stepchildren
from the very beginning.
No one can say
I've treated them badly.
Never ever.
But yes...
I told Rekha to light up the oven.
That's all.
Mother...
Speak up.
I can't find the matchbox
in the kitchen.
May I take yours?
What else! Take it.
But keep it back in its place.
Oh, God! You messed up the room.
What's wrong with you?
I just cleaned room.
Now I have to do it again.
Leave.
I want it back once you're done.
Of course.
Why did Rekha come to you
for a matchbox?
Do you keep the matchboxes here?
Yes... actually...
I can't sleep alone
in the dark at night.
If there was someone...
That's why...
I keep the lamp burning all night.
That's where I keep
the matchbox.
Where? Where?
There?
Yes.
Would you like some tea?
No, not now.
We better go now.
Tea would've been fine.
- What's wrong?
- You're too much, Ajit.
I'll make you tea at home...
- She was being so nice to you.
- Again?
And did you see her face?
It was so unhappy.
- But you...
- It's natural, Ajit.
She's childless. So she doesn't love
her stepchildren.
You have feelings for her it seems.
Her marital life isn't very
satisfying either I think.
Oh, God!
That's very obvious.
That's why
she rebukes the children.
Oh!
See if Freud or Jung came up
with any theories about this.
- You mean 'Oedipus complex'?
- What?
What rubbish are you...
- Where there is fear...
- Darkness follows!
Absolutely.
So... Then...
You two are here as well?
What to do, Bidhu?
It'sour duty
to help our neighbours.
How come the Deputy Commissioner
is here in person?
Whenever there's a
complicated case, there's...
The buffoon...
Umm... Bidhu.
Did you find anything?
Nothing much.
But when you're inquiring
I'm sure there'll be a lot.
But for now...
I'm taking this matchbox
from the house.
Only a matchbox.
Matchbox, huh?
Gojanan, follow me.
Suicide?
What do you think?
What's your opinion?
The letter suggests suicide.
I mean...
the intent is clearly there.
Hmm.
And how did she kill herself?
With poison.
That's what the letter says.
Poison...
How can she kill herself with poison
before even getting it?
Rekha aksed for poison
in the letter.
But the letter was not posted.
It remained under her pillow.
Then where did she get the poison
to commit suicide?
But she also mentioned
other ways...
But why try another way
even before sending the letter?
And no one commits suicide
while lighting an oven, Ajit.
Rekha died suddenly.
The murder weapon was
so fast and sure...
she didn't even get a chance
to move.
The matchstick turned to ash
in her hand.
What if her heart failed?
No idea... only...
hydrocyanic acid has such power.
It's possible.
The aspirin made her heart weak.
This death is not that easy, Ajit.
There's something very wrong.
Make me some tea, my friend.
Need to soak my brain.